Robbing the definitions of _Encounter_ and _Exploration Modes_ directly from [Pathfinder 2E](https://2e.aonprd.com):

> When every individual action counts, you enter the encounter mode of play. In this mode, time is divided into rounds, each of which is 6 seconds of time in the game world. Every round, each participant takes a turn in an established order.

In order to start an **Encounter**, all participants must first roll an [[Initiative]] (`= [[Stat_Agility | Agility]] + [[Stat_Awareness | Awareness]]`) (a special type [[Contested Check]] that is fully resisted). As a courtesy to the _Players_, ties are decided in their favor.

Participants who are not surprised start their first round with 4 [[Resource_Action_Point | Action Points]] (**AP**). **AP** can be used to perform [[Action | Actions]] during the participant's turn or to use Reactions at any point. They are refreshed at the end of the participant's turn. That means users do not need to decide whether to "save" **AP** for reactions.

Often, battles involve leaving all opponents [[Condition_Incapacitated | Incapacitated]], which causes the urgency of the turn-based structure to end (and allows the winning force to decide the fate of the losers). When a creature becomes [[Condition_Incapacitated | Incapacitated]], they are not dead, nor dying - rather they are fully exhausted of some or all of their resources, and thus unconscious and helpless. At that point, they could be executed with a Coup de Grace, or they might incur Consequences (a more permanent type of damage). [[Resource_Vitality_Point | Vitality]], [[Resource_Focus_Point | Focus]] and [[Resource_Spirit_Point | Spirit]] Points can be fully restored with a [[Short Rest]], while Consequences might require more involved treatment.

Typically, while on combat, Attacks by other creatures cannot incur Consequences directly until the target is [[Condition_Incapacitated | Incapacitated]], but rather the battle represents a back and forth of non-lethal attacks depleting resources (points) and maybe causing temporary [[Condition | Conditions]]. However, certain scenarios such as traps or environmental hazards might cause Consequences even if the target is not [[Condition_Incapacitated | Incapacitated]].
