Shattered Wilds use a custom system called **The D12 System**, in which checks are based on a `2d12` roll.

## Attributes

The Attributes in the D12 System are a ternary tree featuring a trickle down mechanism, and starting with your Level as the root attribute. Your Level then divides into 3 realms: Body, Mind and Soul, and they combined branch to the 9 Basic Attributes (STR, DEX, CON, INT, WIS, CHA, DIV, FOW, LCK). Finally, the Basic Attributes branch into 27 Skills.

| Root  |   Realm    | Basic Attribute | Skill       | Description                                                                                                                            |
|-------|------------|-----------------|-------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|       |            |                 | Muscles     | Raw power you can impact in a short burst, e.g. pulling a stuck lever, breaking down an inanimate object, smashing a mug on your hands |
|       |            |       STR       | Stance      | How hard it is to move or push you around, how well you can keep your stance, resist being pushed back                                 |
|       |            |    (Strength)   | Lift        | How much weight you can lift and carry for short periods of times, including yourself (climbing, using ropes, etc)                     |
|       |            |                 | Finesse     | Aim, Quick Fingers, Stealth, Sleight of Hand, precise hand movement, delicate body movements                                                                             |
|       |    Body    |       DEX       | Evasiveness | Evasion, Acrobatics, precise movement of the body                                                                                      |
|       | (Vitality) |   (Dexterity)   | Agility     | Speed, how fast you can move and do things                                                                                             |
|       |            |                 | Toughness   | Damage reduction, tough skin, fall damage                                                                                              |
|       |            |       CON       | Stamina     | Breath, how much exert yourself in a short period of time, your ability to sustain athleticism                                         |
|       |            |  (Constitution) | Resilience  | Resistance to sickness, poison, disease                                                                                                |
|       |            |                 | IQ          | Ability to learn new information, apply logic                                                                                          |
|       |            |       INT       | Knowledge   | Consolidated knowledge and lore about the world                                                                                        |
|       |            |  (Intelligence) | Memory      | Short-term memory, ability to recall details                                                                                           |
|       |            |                 | Perception  | Active perception, seeing, hearing, sensing, feeling                                                                                   |
| Level |    Mind    |       WIS       | Awareness   | Alertness, passive perception, attention to details when not paying attention                                                          |
|       |   (Focus)  |     (Wisdom)    | Intuition   | Common Sense, "Street Smarts", cunning, eg Survival or Animal Handling would be base Intuition (plus any aspect specific bonuses)      |
|       |            |                 | Speechcraft | Rhetoric, speech, ability to persuade, inspire or deceit with language                                                                 |
|       |            |       CHA       | Charm       | Natural panache, beguilingness, body language                                                                                          |
|       |            |    (Charisma)   | Appearance  | Physical attractiveness, ability to dress and present well, body odor                                                                  |
|       |            |                 | Faith       | Strength of your belief your deity [must have one], knowledge about your faith, effectiveness of your Prayers                          |
|       |            |       DIV       | Attunement  | Your general attunement to the Aether, how well you can let divine forces flow through you                                             |
|       |            |    (Divinity)   | Devotion    | Your personal connection to your specific Deity [must have one]                                                                        |
|       |            |                 | Discipline  | Ability to resist urges and temptations, vices and instant gratification                                                               |
|       |    Soul    |       FOW       | Tenacity    | Concentration, ability to ignore pain or hardship or being disturbed and keep going                                                    |
|       |  (Spirit)  | (Force of Will) | Resolve     | Resistance to mind control, social manipulation, deceit, charm; fortitude of the mind; insight                                         |
|       |            |                 | Gambling    | Specifically for when you are gambling                                                                                                 |
|       |            |       LCK       | Fortune     | Your personal luck for your own actions, mainly used for the Luck Die mechanic                                                         |
|       |            |      (Luck)     | Serendipity | Expectations for the external world, also used for the Write History mechanic                                                          |

The way the trickle down works is, for every point you earn on a node past the first, you get to propagate that point to one of the three children. So at Level 1, every single adventurer has the same attributes (bar racial, class and feat bonuses of course). But when they level up to 2, they get to propagate to the Body/Mind/Soul tier, and thus make their first attribute choice. On Level 3, you can propagate to the same node as before, doubling down on one of the 3 realms, and getting to propagate again, or you can generalize and pick a second realm to focus on.

The way modifiers work is that you always roll the most specific check you can, normally a Skill check for skills or a Basic Attribute for core game actions (such as attacks); your modifier on each node is based on its value and the values of the parents. Use the built-in character sheet editor to easily fill up your tree.

Note that will shall very rarely need to use modifiers for nodes other than Basic Attributes and Skills. The final value of a node is also subject to a Level cap: the final node modifier (before applying any external modifiers) is capped at your current level. That means there are diminishing returns to over-specializing, and players are encouraged to have at least a minimal level of spread.

## Derived Stats

You have 5 [[Resource Point | Resource Points]] that are derived from your attributes:

* [[Resource_Heroism_Point | Heroism Points]] are based on your Level; each character has a max number of [[Resource_Heroism_Point | Heroism Points]] equal to their Level value. They can be used to invoke Extras and Luck (see below), to call for Write History, amongst other powerful actions. These are harder to recover, at one per long rest rate plus the DM can award [[Resource_Heroism_Point | Heroism Points]] (within your maximum) to reward good roleplaying or other out-of-the-box thinking (similar to the Inspiration mechanic in D&D 5e).
* [[Resource_Action_Point | Action Points]] represent the number of actions you can take during your turn while in an [[Encounter]]; they reset at the end of your turn.
* [[Resource_Vitality_Point | Vitality Points]] are based on your [[Body]] and represent your physical ability to keep going during intense situations. They are analogous to Health on other games, but in the D12 System, you only take real damage after you are [[Incapacitated]]. You have a max [[Resource_Vitality_Point | Vitality Points]] equal to 4 + your [[Body]] modifier. You lose [[Resource_Vitality_Point | Vitality]] when you are attacked, and they can also be spent to power special abilities.
* [[Resource_Focus_Point | Focus Points]] are based on your [[Mind]] and represent your mental vigor and ability to focus during intense situations. They are analogous to Mana in other games for Arcane casters, but they are also used by any characters to power special abilities that require focus, mental acuity and concentration. You have a max [[Resource_Focus_Point | Focus Points]] equal to 4 + your [[Mind]] modifier. You can lose [[Resource_Focus_Point | Focus Points]] when you are distracted.
* [[Resource_Spirit_Point | Spirit Points]] are based on your [[Soul]] and represent your morale and spiritual strength. They are a different form of Mana (for non-Arcane powers) or a form of mental stress or morale in other games, but they are also used by any characters to power special abilities. You have a max [[Resource_Spirit_Point | Spirit Points]] equal to 4 + your [[Soul]] modifier.

Other derived stats are:

* Initiative = Awareness + Agility, used to determine order in combat via an Initiative Check
* Movement = [3 (humanoid base) + Size Modifier + (Agility / 4) (rounded down)] hexes / turn

## Checks

A base Check is `2d12 + [Modifiers]`, and is either matched against a DC (Difficulty Class) of the task (Static Check, which is always considered Active), or matched against a check from an opponent (Contested Check). On Contested Checks, there is always an active participant, which is the one taking the Action (Active Contested Check), and one or more passive recipients of the action (Passive Contested Checks).

Success means having a result greater than the DC (or Passive Contested Check), meaning that a tie will typically maintain the status quo (no change). However, if the Active Participant has a Crit Modifier (see below), they will win ties.

There is also the possibility of rolling extra D12s, up to two, for two different mechanics, Extras and Luck (see below). Whenever you roll more than 2 dice, you get to pick which 2 to use, as you can never sum up more than 2 dies (think D&D Advantage). So if you are using Extra and Luck in the same roll, you will be able to roll 4d12, and pick any 2 of your choice.  Note that, unlike other systems, extra dice rolls are not awarded for in-game situational "advantages" or "disadvantages", as these factors are _always_ modelled as Modifiers to the roll (player modifiers or circumstantial modifiers).

### Crit Modifiers

Critical Rolls are handled differently in the D12 system. There are two steps to determine criticality; first, you apply Crit Modifiers to your roll:

* +6 to your roll if you have at least one 12
* +6 to your roll if you have at least a pair

Note that you can get each one of the +6's only once per roll, for a max total of +12. That means the maximum natural roll is 36 (2 * 12 + 6 + 6), with a probability of 1/144 (0.69%).

Crit Modifiers are applied to all types of Checks. However, if you are rolling an Active Check (typically an Active Contested Check), you can also accumulate Crit Shifts.

### Crit Shifts

If the active participant passes the check, finally they can convert any excesses of +6 into a Crit Shift, even if they didn't originate from a Crit Modifier.

These Crit Shifts are typically only applicable for Active Contested Checks, however they could also be used for some Static Checks, depending on the situation.

So for a few examples, you attack the enemy and roll a 10 and 7, and have a total modifier of +3. That will be a 20 without any Crit Modifier; however if the opponent contests rolling a total of 12, since you an advantage of 8 points, you get 1 Crit Shift.

What does this "Shift" mean? The effect of a Crit Shift will depend on the nature of the check. If it is a Basic Attack, that means additional damage to the enemy's Vitality Points. If it is some other form of contest, it means an advantage to be determined by the DM. For example, if you are trying to influence an ally to do you a favor, they might not just do it but somehow consider it as you doing them a favor for the honor of asking them. This is similar to how Shifts work on Core FATE. If it is a Static Check, typically Crit Shifts are not applicable, but could depending on the specific situation.

So in essence, the Crits are two-folded; if you would otherwise be below target, they help you get over, and if you are already over, they can give you extra Shifts.

### Auto Fail

There is also an Auto Fail condition to any Active Checks; if you roll a pair of 1s, you instantly fail the check, regardless of anything else. This condition is checked across all the dies you roll, even ones you did not pick or even ones that were not valid (for Extra and Luck dice).

The probability of an Auto Fail, if rolling two dice, is of 0.69% (though that is bumped to 3.72% if rolling 4 dice). This does not apply to Passive Checks.

### Extra

It is possible to roll an extra d12 when doing a check by invoking an Extra. You can do that when you are in a situation in which you can leverage a different base attribute to perform a Skill check. For example, imagine you are trying to deceive a guard with a Speechcraft check, but you have a high WIS. You can leverage your WIS score to complement your Speechcraft modifier by invoking an Extra. Extra (and Luck) Dice must be invoked before the roll is made, and you must pay 1 [[Resource_Heroism_Point | Heroism Point]] to do so. You roll an extra distinct d12, and you must roll less or equal than your Extra modifier. If you do, that is a valid Extra die that can be picked for the final total. If you roll more than your attribute, you just ignore that die for the final total. Note that regardless if you pick the extra die or even if it is valid or not, for active contested rolls, if you roll a pair of 1s amongst any of your dies, that is an Auto Fail.

### Luck

Similarly (and potentially additionally) to Extra, you can invoke your supernatural Luck to aid you in any roll. You similarly must pay 1 [[Resource_Heroism_Point | Heroism Point]], and add one distinct Luck d12 to the pool. The result of it must be below your Fortune score. Same rules as for the Extra die apply, including the extended chance of Auto Fail. Pushing your luck goes both ways.
